next the early years of the CIA this
discussion looks at the centralization
of intelligence gathering into one
agency the CIA and the department's
early years from 1947 to 1950
professor Wesley Clark is an associate
professor of history at the University
of Toronto and coordinator of the
international relations program
professor work holds an MA from
Cambridge University and a PhD from the
London School of Economics he is
associate editor of intelligence and
national security and serves on the
executive of the Canadian Association
for security and international studies
he is author of numerous books and
articles including the ultimate enemy
British intelligence in Nazi Germany
1933 to 1939
Kent thank you David I'd like to begin
by unburdening myself of a reminiscence
of my own encounter with President
Truman I was an occasion a large public
occasion where I hadn't the opportunity
to address him and an unusual response
and that when he responded he
immediately took the action I had
recommended the occasion was actually on
the ellipse between the hind the White
House in December 1947 it was actually
the National Christmas Tree Lighting I
was the boy scout assigned to give the
greetings of American youth to the
President and as part of my my speech to
him I suggested that he pressed the
button to light the tree in his response
which was quite gracious he took exactly
that action and I was impressed with the
influence that I'd already acquired over
the president I wanted to tell you this
at the outset because my career as a
presidential advisor peaked early and I
really have no other similar examples to
report you may be gratified by that
because on occasions like this in
essences it's expensive and what's the
work and I are both aware that only our
presentations stand between you and
lunch
the it has been a long time since Harry
Truman was president the distinguished
Yale historian of the South Sea van were
C Vann Woodward once wrote that the
twilight zone that lies between living
memory and written history is one of the
favorite breeding places for mythology
and I think in looking back at the
Truman administration we're about into
that Twilight Zone I'd have to say
however that CIA's been in that zone
probably from it's very inception it's
been breeding myths almost from the day
it was born and this of course is
principally because of the enormous
secrecy that is always surrounded a
foreign intelligence organization such
as CIA we've always had constraints on
living memory we all signed secret
payments which not only apply while
we're serving in CIA but to a lesser
extent even after we resign or rito
CIA's unwillingness to release its
records the continued so records it's
very difficult to produce conference of
course as well as its two predecessors
is to try to and to we have both living
memory with us today the presentations
and we have such people as former
director many other distinguished people
who served in that early period at the
beginning organizations and in the
presentations we have that you aren't
that from authors historians which will
produce I think
what I want to do my assignment actually
stays from 1947 to 1950 and I want to
assure four years what I do want to do
is look at five developments which I
think we're really turning points in the
agency evolved over the years those
first the appointment of Roscoe Helen
cutter as director of central one second
event was the passage of the National
Security months later and of course
that's the act that established a
statutory Center one out of the National
Security Act came two things there's a
phrase than the Book of Common Prayer
and a general confession those things we
ought to have done and done those things
which we ought not to have done and I
think the things that did that we in my
opinion that we ought not to have done
and I'll explain
next the CIA of what became a very large
commitment to covert action creation in
the summer of 1948 of the office of
policy coordination the things we left
undone were revealed in the next year in
the beginning of 1949 in the famous
Dulles report the Mary McAuliffe talked
about and this was the criticism that
CIA had not carried out its coordinating
mission had not produced a systematic
method for estimates and for
coordinating intelligence the last of
the five events after this is the advent
of general Walter Bedell Smith as
Director of Central Intelligence and he
is the this is following after the
outbreak of the Korean War in June of
1950 this is when CIA comes out of what
has been a period in many respects of
drift under Admiral Helen cutter into a
new period of reinvigoration reform
reorganization Admiral cutters
appointment was a perfectly logical one
and in many ways very some of them ACMA
Helen Keller was very experienced
officer if you looked in the Navy for
senior officers who had experience with
intelligence he would certainly be on
any short list he was a man that
inspired a great deal of loyalty and
people that worked for him a man of very
considerable intelligence of perception
so it's certainly not my purpose to
denigrate
Admiral Helen cutter but if you look at
and compare him and contrasting with his
predecessor quite Vandenberg and was the
successor general Smith I think you
began to see why Helen Keller in my view
was a very unsuccessful Director of
Central Intelligence the first thing I'd
say and it's already been brought up in
the question period is that Admiral
Helen Keller was a Rear Admiral and this
in Washington he his predecessor was a
three-star Army General his successor
was a three-star Army General and both
of them with very great public
reputations for brilliant wartime career
I'll tell you a little bit about Admiral
Helen cutters background which will both
show that it was quite an estimable
officer but not a man with the kind of
reputation and already said a younger
man not actually younger than Vandenberg
but a junior man goes to Vandenberg and
Smith he graduated from the Naval
Academy in 1919 had the usual
assignments until the 1930s when he
spent most of that time as a naval
attache assistant naval attache in the
naval attache in Paris and with various
other additional duties elsewhere
in Europe he was the naval attache in
Paris at the fall of France in June of
1940 and when the u.s. embassy moved to
Vichy to the Patton regime after the
Germans occupied part of France
including Paris
he served in Vichy and that of course is
where Admiral William lay a former Chief
of Naval Operations was the American
ambassador Roosevelt sent him as
ambassador Division so he first came to
the attention I'm sure they already knew
who he was but they worked together and
this certainly had an influence on his
later appointment he did serve in
intelligence in the Pacific War with
some distinction after the war he was
sent back to Paris as a naval attache
and promoted to Rear Admiral in November
of 1946 so when he took office on the
1st of May 1947 he was a very new Rear
Admiral and he was given a job of
enormous proportions we were just on the
verge of the passage of the National
Security Act the whole definition of
what CIA would be would have to be
determined by experience and by the
leadership of this director because if
you read that 7 inches out of the 35
that David described of the National
Security Act the 7 inches that are on
CIA it's a very vague description very
short and very vague so this is the
appointment of Admiral Helen Keller I
find was the wrong man
at that time what Hillman but Vandenberg
and Smith both had that Helen cutter Lac
was a real instinct and experience as
well as the the benefits of rank and
prestige to succeed in bureaucratic
infighting and I think Admiral Helen
cutter one of the things that obviously
recommends him to many of us is that he
had no real taste for this kind of the
cut and thrust that's necessary in
Washington our Jack Smith who's been
quoted
earlier in his book his memoirs of his
experience in CIA wrote of Admiral Helen
cutter that he was a thoroughly decent
unpretentious man but a Rear Admiral
said in the hierarchical maze of
official Washington his authority
scarcely extended beyond the front door
and there's a good deal of truth in this
and this this was Helen cutters
difficulty well moving from the
appointment of Admiral Helen Connery
let's look at the National Security Act
and what it actually laid out for CIA
one it is clear that the National
Security Act was intended to be to
create an organization principally for
intelligence talked about the difference
between intelligence and operations
there was no question that it would
carry out the operations that had
already been carried brought in through
the SS use the successor to OSS that it
would continue to do foreign
intelligence collection espionage but
there was that was not mentioned in the
act and indeed in the testimony for
general Vandenberg had said yes of
course we will do it but it will be
peripheral to our mission there was no
mention at all and I think no real
thought of the possibility of what later
became called covert action so the what
it principally in the National Security
Act the main part of the National
Security Act was to create a national
military establishment what eventually
became the Department of Defense an
independent Air Force a statutory JCS
etc it also had a coordinating
organization for coordinating national
security policy in the National Security
Council and CIA was sort of tacked in
Vanderburgh had convinced the government
the administration of President Truman
and others that CIA needed aid that you
needed the CIA a statutory CIA but it
was put in there to be as unobtrusive as
possible and not to provoke debate
because it's clear that the unification
issue was going to be the principle
issue in the National Security Act so
with the National Security Act and with
its brevity and it's short and obscure
document we then come to as and say the
things though that we did that we ought
not have done the things left undone the
things that CIA undertook and I'd say it
to great credit and admire Helen Keller
he opposed this consistently but without
success and this was the acquisition of
a large what became a large covert
action commitment this began in the fall
of 1947 originally the idea was to put
it in the State Department some sort of
organization for carrying on a sort of
mirror image of the Soviets they were
subverting Western European government
subsidizing communist parties and that
we had to find some way to help our
friends and help counter their influence
and that this had to be done
covertly and the search was how you did
it and who undertook it well the State
Department wanted to determine policy
but George Marshall said I won't have
that in the State Department it would
obviously destroy the credibility of
American diplomacy if that were a
mission and the State Department it was
in a small way it was given to the
Office of Special Operations and in the
CIA which carried on quite effective
covert action in the spring of 1948 that
period of a growing war scare or panic
after the Czech coup in February 48 and
the strikes and the Italian elections
and so on and Oso did some very
effective covert action but there was
coming particularly out of the state
part and out of George Kennan as the
director of the policy first director of
the policy planning staff gave an idea
that we needed a more systematic
organization and this was created in
June of 1949 has the off of what became
called the office of policy coordination
by the end of the summer they had gotten
a dynamic leader a deputy - an Assistant
Secretary of State
with a distinguished war record in OSS
especially in the Balkans and in Germany
Frank Wisner who led to OPC and OPC was
created so that it was put in the CIA
for quarters and rations administrative
ly but actually it took its direction
the director of OPC Frank Wisner was to
take its direction from the Secretary of
State and Secretary of Defense really
bypassing the director of Central
Intelligence as I say and it's been
mentioned before Helen cutter opposed
this whole concept but it was imposed
upon him OPC grew and became an almost
autonomous Empire and grew very rapidly
and this this development was a part of
CIA that nobody I think had foreseen
although there were of course plenty of
precedents for it in the experience of
OSS in the Second World War the next
thing I want to talk about the things
that were left undone and this came
where these were really brought to the
administration of attention and a report
the survey of CIA that was done during
1948 by a group of three men all with
intelligence experience commissioned by
the National Security Council really by
Secretary of Defense James Forrestal and
Paul mitzi this was expected to be a
rather routine report but this committee
chaired by Allen Dulles not NCI but a
man with great a prestige for his work
in Barron in the middle of occupied
Europe all through the Second World War
Allen Dulles conducted this survey and
submitted at the beginning of January
1949 and it was a really quite
devastating critique of CIA not of the
covert action although it did make a
recommendation that the espionage and
counterintelligence and covert action
should all be brought together into a
single Operations Division which would
have implications for the sort of free
reign of OPC the criticisms were
oppressively that the Central
Intelligence Agency and the DCI were not
carrying out the coordinating functions
that was supposed to do
it was not coordinating and planning and
then the operation of what we would now
call the intelligence community most
importantly it was not it had not
organized the systematic way of
producing estimates national
intelligence estimates for senior
policymakers the other side of that
criticism had become very much immersed
in current intelligence and that the it
was an organization that was adrift and
not carrying out its function the
National Security Council in July of
1949 essentially endorsed these
criticisms and directed Admiral Helen
cutter to take steps to make the
necessary changes in reforms this was
really of course a vote of no confidence
in Admiral Helen cutter but it in fact
it's already been pointed out he was in
office
for almost another year and a half and
12 October of 1950 and it was only after
the North Koreans attacked South Korea
that Harry Truman finally made the
decision to change the directors some
people called Helen cutter the amiable
Dutchman and I think it speaks for the
quality of his personality and so on
that he could stay on for that long he
wasn't trying to hang on but I think he
also knew that his effectiveness was
ended in the summer of 1950 Harry Truman
selected Walter Bedell Smith as the new
director of central intelligence Smith
having just had a stomach surgery for
ulcers couldn't actually take office
until October but Walter Bedell Smith
again it's a great contrast with the
unassuming Admiral Helen cutter one he
had rank he had enormous prestige he had
been chief of staff for General
Eisenhower for starting with the North
African campaign and then in the whole
conquest of Europe after the war Harry
Truman had sent him to Russia to the
Soviet Union as his ambassador is
American ambassador
as mad a tremendous drive for an
enormous e forceful personality I think
refined once said I've heard the set of
many good people
Admiral King among others but of Smith
that described as the man of the most
even the most even-tempered man you ever
ran into always in a rage and the Smith
nevertheless had a great capability also
for inspiring those who worked for him
and he came in and took the CIA that was
really adrift and imposed reforms
essentially taking the Dulles report of
the beginning in 1949 is his agenda and
he brought pretty good things
reorganized it I suppose the most met
and most remembered reforms are several
one he took charge of OPC he immediately
told Frank Wisner the head of OPC that
no longer what he left to the Secretary
of State and Secretary of Defense for
guidance but he would get it from the
director and Wisner accepted this as did
the defense in State Department he
organized a systematic method for
producing estimates the famous Board of
estimates with a supporting staff a
small body five university professors a
lawyer and the general as the board of
estimates led by William Langer who had
led the research and analysis branch
that Barry Cates described during the
Second World War a very distinguished
professor of diplomatic history from
Harvard he reorganized the structure of
CIA into the directorates it's that we
still but today he did all this and I
think actually when we look at what was
achieved
I think Beatle Smith clearly comes as
one of the great directors of Central
Intelligence nevertheless before you
left and I think this story had been
quoted briefly by
christopher andrews and that is that
evil smith recognized that although he
had brought OPC under control that the
kind of things that were going on that
cia's commitment and the enormous growth
of that covert action part of the agency
was in danger of engulfing the CIA and
then a document which is i think number
two in the and number 72 in your in your
booklet at a staff meeting on the 22nd
of october of nineteen fifty one beetle
smith is reported to say the director
feels that operations have assumed such
a very large size in comparison to our
intelligence function that we have
almost arrived at a stage where it is
necessary to decide whether CIA will
remain an intelligence agency or become
a cold war department so I would
conclude by saying that we have to
admire the enormous achievements of
General Smith and reforming CIA but I
think we also have to regret especially
when we look at the investigations of
1975 and 1976 which are almost entirely
focused on covert action we really have
to continue to regret the enormous
excursion into covert action that began
during the Helen cutter years and with
the consequences that have plagued the
agency for many years after that thank
you
[Applause]
ladies and gentlemen I have no
reminiscences whatsoever about the
Truman administration I'm also conscious
at the time as was my colleague Ken
McDonald and I will try to skip through
the paper that I prepared in order to
give us hopefully some time for
questions and to release you for lunch
as well let me just begin by saying that
I only wish we had conferences of this
kind in Canada but I come from one of
the in the intelligence dimension at
least from the most secretive
democracies in the world Canada has not
yet got around to releasing its second
world war signals intelligence documents
and indeed the Canadian Prime Minister
of the time Mackenzie King was kept
ignorant of the existence of Canadian
signals intelligence unit which existed
next door to his official residence in
Ottawa throughout the course of the war
and there's no sign that we're going to
have any quick access to post 1945
documents so I I come envious to this
kind of gathering historians are
professionally touched by nostalgia they
love anniversaries let me begin
indirectly by mentioning 130 years ago
saw the first public screening of one of
the quintessential cultural productions
of the Cold War Stanley Kubrick's dr.
Strangelove one particular scene comes
to mind even in the midst of impending
Armageddon the devilish Reds in the
persona of the Soviet ambassador cannot
refrain from engaging in a bit of spying
by clandestinely photographing the big
board in the president's strategic
command bunker the Ambassador is caught
in the act by the overheated cold war
warrior general bucket or Jetson to no
particular effect beyond raising the
generals Nukem fever even higher the New
York Times film reviewer thought the
whole production of dr. Strangelove
quotes the most shattering sick joke
I've ever come across and it was 30
years later Kubrick's Strangelove enjoys
the status of icon the iconography would
not be complete without some reference
to one of the Cold War's great popular
culture symbols the spy this figure was
new in American popular culture only the
most tenuous links existed between the
Cold War's cultural
fantasies about espionage and the
stillborn 19th century American vision
is prefigured in james fenimore cooper's
the spy and in the mid 19th century
outpouring of dime novels with spy
characters the longer and what
continuous tradition of british spy
fiction simply did not exist what US
popular culture required was a reality
to mime that reality was of course born
during the Truman administration during
the period 1947 to 1950 the United
States finally experienced its own
version of a ubiquitous 20th century
phenomenon and intelligence revolution
insofar as the creation of the Central
Intelligence Agency in 1947 signaled
that the United States was entering a
revolutionary extreme established by
others and repeating patterns of
intelligence mobilization already
experienced decades earlier by other
powers it might seem that there is
nothing terribly unique about the u.s.
experience beyond the fact of its
belatedness but there are some startling
features of America's entry into the
intelligence game as a permanent player
in peacetime one is the rapid change a
pace of change experienced by the
Central Intelligence Agency and more
broadly the US intelligence community
after 1947 change not only came quickly
but was largely unplanned if there was
ever a blueprint it was rendered
irrelevant by ad-hoc United States
responses to Cold War pressures and by
the vacuuming up of new missions by a
CIA which in this feature at least
closely resembled the modus operandi of
its wartime predecessor the Office of
Strategic Services what began in 1947 is
a small analytical and reporting unit to
provide coordinated intelligence
assessments for the president quickly
mutated as we've seen into an agency
with significant psychological warfare
covert operations and foreign
intelligence gathering capabilities an
agency which had its sites first set
firmly on the frontlines of the Cold War
in Europe soon came to have a global
mission with an increased emphasis on
political instability and change in
Latin America following the cries of
intelligence failure that surrounded the
outburst of la violencia
in Colombia in Bogota Colombia in 1948
and a major role in Asia following the
so-called loss of China the subsequent
establishment of a major intelligence
based on Taiwan and the outbreak of the
Korean
in 1950 it would seem sensible to
presume that during this initial period
of headlong growth the CIA and its
sister agencies were also enlarging
their technological capabilities
certainly were known of which we've
heard was being worked on by the young
AFSA could talk refer meredith gardner
and the first photo reconnaissance
missions were being flown to penetrate
the iron curtain but about these
activities we have little reliable
documentary material and the eager
historian waits awaits their potential
declassification but there is a further
feature of the late and fast us entry
into intelligence which marks the u.s.
experience as unique I think it concerns
the way in which the United States
constructed its new intelligence system
in public this was historically
unprecedented like the evolution of the
Central Intelligence Agency the public
unfolding of a debate over the nature
and purpose of intelligence was
unplanned but probably inevitable its
origins were in the politics of leaking
but public debate was sustained by press
and sporadic congressional interest and
by the background noise of popular
anxiety and what Michael Rogen in his
book Ronald Reagan the movie labeled the
counter subversive tradition in American
life that the United States might need
to construct a permanent intelligence
service in peacetime raised the specter
not just of Soviet espionage nurtured by
early news from the underground in the
form of the Elizabeth Bentley Judith
Copeland Alger Hiss Whitaker chambers
cases and others it also to some Minds
spelled the emergence of an American
Gestapo this was a theme certainly from
the moment the Walter trollin the
Chicago Tribune journalist and a new
dealer famously published in February
1945 the top-secret plan of what
generally Donovan for a post-war OSS
much has been written about this episode
my interest in it stems from the fact
that the TRO and leak was a bombshell
which registered as a shock on the
emerging landscape of u.s. societal
accommodation to the fast-setting Cold
War for its signal not only an early
Cold War debate about intelligence but
also the beginning of a popular culture
production about spying for it was to
prove a short step from the proposition
that intelligence was news that could
sell to the proposition that
stories of espionage were an alluring
form of news that could fill the void of
Cold War secrecy and a deed of the Cold
War's unimaginable Armageddon and could
sell let me try to trace these
connections briefly leak began leaked
after a fashion troll and story have
seemed it seems helped stalemate
Donovan's plan especially in the period
of transition from the Roosevelt Truman
presidencies and from war to peace or
quasi peace but general Donovan was
never one to tolerate defeat and after
the Truman administration's abolition of
the OSS in September 1945 he helped
mount a counter-attack of sorts a form
of leaking which took the shape of
securing favorable press and press
accounts of the achievements of the OSS
during the war and the publication of
memoirs by loyal OSS hands the immediate
achievements of the Donovan inspired
advertising campaign for OSS style
intelligence was probably limited
possibly even counterproductive insofar
as it helped fix an image of
intelligence as guerrilla warfare in the
minds of the American public the
relevance of such action in the early
days of the Cold War at least could not
have been entirely clear but the other
strands of thinking that soon emerged
quite independently of the politically
inspired messages of trogon and Donovan
and his allies these focused principally
on the lessons of intelligence failure
during the Second World War especially
with regard to Pro Harbor the subject of
an endless stream of congressional
inquiries culminating in the massive
exercise to fix blame the report of the
Joint Committee on the investigation of
a Pearl Harbor attack which published
its 39 volumes of testimony and evidence
in 1946 Pearl Harbor was not simply a
lesson from the past it was quickly
elided with the shock of the atom bomb
to produce the scarify envision of an
atomic Pearl Harbor it was this vision
that underlay the sober and impressive
journalism a former war correspondent
Hansen Baldwin perhaps the most
sophisticated commentator in the
American press on intelligence matters
during the early Cold War in the course
of a series of articles written for the
national press between 1945 and 1948
Baldwin would emerge is the principal
journalistic crusader for a strong
American intelligence system in his
first article addressing this theme
printed in October 1945 and entitled a
Tom
age lessons Baldwin conjured up a vision
of an atomic Pearl Harbor and coined the
phrase that would become his trademark
an adequate I quote adequate
intelligence service the world's finest
is today the first line of defense what
began as an evocative form phrase making
was soon extended into thoughtful and
articulate analysis in a series of
pieces published during 1946 and 1947
all loosely tied to the ongoing struggle
to create a centralized peacetime
intelligence service in Washington in
1946 peace Baldwin opened with an
argument for intelligence as again the
nation's first line of defense I quote
because this gives the substance I think
of his thoughts in the age of atom bombs
of transit oceanic rockets and of
submarines that can cross the Atlantic
at 25 knots submerged any effective
military system is impossible with
adequate and without inadequate
intelligence of what is going on he then
proceeded to contrast America's post-war
needs and intelligence with a record of
performance in world war ii which he
found shoddy Baldwin kept a close watch
on intelligence developments in the US
government and attempted to use his
journalism to stimulate further
improvements in the nascent intelligence
system and to alert the public to what
he saw as laggard Lee or ineffectual
measures but he was not alone crusader
general Donovan for one continued to use
the press and slick magazines as a venue
for his own special and enthusiastic
reading of uses of intelligence in
American statecraft his vision
essentially hearkened back to the
experience of the OSS in the Second
World War and saw a new role for OSS
style intelligence service in combating
a new Soviet version of the Fifth Column
warfare techniques which he attributed
to the Third Reich
Donovan among others was convinced that
he was writing against the grain of US
public attitudes in a major article
written for Life magazine in 1946
entitled intelligence key to defense
don't have been argued that intelligence
was necessary for a world power such as
the United States had become that all
other powers involved themselves in
espionage especially the Russians and
that the people of the United States
would simply have to get over there what
he called innate aversion to espionage
but the available evidence from public
opinion polls suggest the United States
citizens had by 1946 certainly grown
used to need for a foreign espionage
agency and of the existence of an army
of Russian spies at work in their midst
other contributors to the running
journalistic debate sounded themes less
futuristic than Baldwin's or less rooted
in the OS X experience than Donovan's
one of these themes a major what I think
was basically nationalistic and
patriotic and it emerged to complement
fears of an atomic Pearl Harbor and of
Soviet Fifth Column warfare general
Vandenberg for example used this kind of
argument with a twist
in his campaign for support of the
National Security Act legislation to
create and expanded CIA Vandenberg
testified to Congress that one of the
purposes behind the Act was to ensure
that the United States was never again
in the I quote humiliating position of
having to go hat in hand begging foreign
governments for the eyes the foreign
intelligence with which to see a new
boots running parallel to this
journalistic debate on the issue of
American intelligence needs was a more
academic investigation which saw the
publication of the first generation of
analytical works on intelligence as a
government activity participants in this
investigation included George patty who
published a slim monograph in 1946
called the future of American secret
intelligence William Langer who
contributed occasional articles to
scholarly journals on the subject David
Bruce the former OSS station chief in
London during the war who wrote
sometimes anonymously for highbrow
magazines like Atlantic Monthly but the
has gives me crowning achievement of the
first phase of this activity was Yale
historian Sherman Kent's was also of
course an OSS veteran his book strategic
intelligence for world policy published
in 1949 Kent advocated special attention
to what he called speculative evaluative
intelligence designed to give
policymakers a sense of the direction in
which world politics were headed
intelligence reporting would require
Kant warned the careful avoidance of
stultifying preconceptions the
distancing of intelligence from any
self-serving political agendas and the
cultivation of a devil's advocacy
mentality Kent pleaded for the need for
one
men in intelligence who could apply the
instruments of reason and scientific
method these were significant and
important nostrums and Kent and others
of his ilk were to have their chance to
practice them in long careers in the CIA
the academic investigation like its
journalistic counterpart helped keep
attention focused on intelligence issues
and helped codify problems in the
American conduct of intelligence the
journalistic investigation helps to
define the role of American intelligence
in the post-war world and helped
accustom the American populace to the
need for intelligence yet these
investigations lost steam at the end of
the 1940s to be followed by a period of
secrecy and tight lived bipartisanship
which supported the so called golden age
of CIA operations in the 1950s the age
of McCarthyism also lowered itself onto
the scene but the silence did not last
forever bursts of impassioned commentary
erupted in the 1960s following the Bay
of Pigs fiasco and then of course
spectacularly in the mid 1970s
stimulated in part by the investigative
journalism of the Pulitzer Prize winners
Seymour Hersh in another significant
sense the public silence at the end of
the 1940s about intelligence did not
last any time at all instead the
production shifted to the fictional end
of the popular culture spectrum and we
began to see the emergence of a
homegrown pop vision of espionage
exemplified by among other things the
hard and often terminal pounding but
blockbuster author of Mickey Spillane
would have his hero Mike Hammer
delivered to commies during the 1950's
this was a decade remember when Spillane
wrote six out of the ten top out of the
top ten fictional bestsellers it was
also in the decade it was also in this
decade of the 1950s that espionage
invaded American television screens for
the first time with a production of I
led three lives a set of no less than
117 half-hour episodes that ran from
1953 to 1956 based on the exploits of
Herbert Philbrick the key witness in
this myth Act espionage trial of 1949
a brief conclusion that a permanent
operational intelligence service and a
popular culture of espionage were both
launched more or less simultaneously
during the presidency of Harry s Truman
was largely an accident of history
Truman unlike John F Kennedy was not so
far as I know an aficionado of spy
novels he claimed in his retirement at
least not to be an aficionado of the
Central Intelligence Agency and chris
andrew has quoted from some of Truman's
writing on this effect I shall skip my
quote from his famous letter to The
Washington Post in which he argued that
some the CIA had been diverted from its
original tasks whatever the substance of
that that letter and other emanations
from from the former president it was
overshadowed by the forces of popular
culture that had been unleashed during
his presidency for every intervention in
the real world of intelligence a mimetic
possibility had now come to exist in the
fictional world of the popular culture
of spying Truman's complaints in public
about the CIA after his retirement soon
found an echo and one of the earliest
exposes of the CIA an article written by
David wise and Thomas Ross the invisible
government published in Look magazine on
the 16th of June 1964 the wise in Ross
article which was really a trailer for
their soon to be published book of the
same title voted Truman's letter as part
of its assertion that there are two
governments in the United States today
one visible the other invisible the
invisible government gathers
intelligence conducts espionage and
plans and executes secret operations all
over the globe the invisible government
was according to the author's run by a
small Directorate known by the rather
disappointing title of the group from
Truman to wise and Ross there flowed
thus flow the seed for a conspiratorial
vision of the US intelligence community
that would also nurture such popular
paranoid fantasies as The Manchurian
Candidate the film released in 1962 and
later the Faye Dunaway Robert Redford
vehicle three days of the Condor popular
culture in its portrait of the spy as
hero and as antihero of intelligence
services that its services as saviors of
civiles
and also as it's wreckers proved to have
the power to both sanction and to D
legitimize the functions of an
intelligence community in American
society we need I think to understand
this power a great deal better than we
do this is not a matter of being a fan
of spy novels spy films or other forms
of popular culture rather it's a
question of exploring the foundations of
the perceived legitimacy of intelligence
in the United States the pursuit of
which Erica ransom won the holy grail of
the Central Intelligence Agency
without legitimacy there can be no
effective Intelligence Service and
without understanding the cultural
foundations of legitimacy we cannot
appreciate the evolution and operations
of intelligence services in their
historical context
[Applause]
Thank You Kent this on can you hear this
yeah okay
I've been Frank I'm chief historian of
the Marine Corps and I'd like to give a
little sidebar about Donovan's career
you know early on in the war FDR was
very much intrigued by the operations of
the British commandos and force his
interest was probably piqued by a lot of
stuff that Churchill told him and FDR
thought that nothing would do but we'd
have our own commando group and that the
Marines would be the best ones to man it
and he was all ready to give Donovan a
commission as a general officer in the
Marine Corps you can imagine how that
was reacted to in the Corps it never
came to pass
there's a little difficult to see with
the lion sir sir
on Weitzman the Hoover Institution
there's an aspect to the early years of
the OSS which I think has been
overlooked
perhaps mentioned in passing and that
was the extraordinary idea that the
trade unions in exile at that time or
under Nazi control should be used and
recruited in preliminary to the d-day
invasion and in fact they're one of the
best people who was assigned to that job
was David Bruce later ambassador to UK
and Arthur Goldberg later Supreme Court
justice who did an enormous amount plus
others of course of recruiting trade
unionists from Belgium and France
Germany Italy who were very useful in
plants for sabotage like the use of the
International transport workers
Federation which was very helpful or
radio marine operators from neutral
countries who could spot German
submarines surfacing for and report to
their location this is a piece of work
which really needs a lot of research
done on it because we've in when the
Cold War began this policy continued
again and was very useful in the early
stages of the Cold War both in France
and in Italy
I think I think that's absolutely right
I think that it would be very
interesting to follow up particularly
what was called the labor desk of the
OSS and the continuity
what a four timer pro se I don't want to
take time today Ken to debate with you
the role of the word espionage and the
act we'll do that tomorrow because I
think you're a little off the track I am
not under the impression than the
Jackson Dulles career commission that
Korea had any intelligence experience
whatsoever he was a lawyer and a major
firm in New York had been assistant US
attorney was very close to Forrestal
personally had a very fine officer but I
don't think he was in intelligence but
perhaps you've got some figures I don't
know but I do think this business was
that I see it this morning of hatchet in
a neural Hill encoder and trying to bury
him is not quite fair to the record he
made in the agency under very difficult
conditions but even in OPC I remember
the years when we used to go up and
testify on the hill how proud he was of
particularly the radios radio live Radio
Free Europe that Tom Braden knew so much
about nor do I consider the Jackson
career Dulles report a vote of no
confidence in he'll encounter hell
encounter left at that after the start
of the Korean War and we didn't fail to
predict that as much some speakers have
indicated Helen Carter left because the
command he hoped to have was made open
by giving him command of the cruiser
fleet with his flag I think on the st.
Paul off the Korean coast mr. Truman had
great admiration for hilly and as far as
the Jackson Korea Dulles report
it's not a vote of no-confidence any
more than any report whether it comes
from the Congress or something indicates
disagreements with the way certain
things are going or the hope that
certain things can be done better and it
was obvious certain things could be done
better but to call it a vote of
no-confidence despite the personal
ambitions for allen dulles having the
chair and for bill jackson to having
something we never quite figured out
what all he finally succeeded in getting
was a new wife and a considerable
quantity of booze which eventually
killed him well I'd like to thank Walter
for so I'd like to say a couple of
things what are the one of the hazards
of speaking at an occasion like this is
that there are people like Walter
pforzheimer Sam Halperin's another one
who not only were there at the time but
also have Total Recall so far be it for
me dude well actually he's quite right
about Korea who had served in the Navy
as I recall in the second war but had no
intelligence experience that's true I
would say though I don't I suspect and
we can pursue this further but I don't
think we probably differ that much I
admired Helen cutter as well I think
darling perhaps protests too much I also
admire darling he taught me history in
school so I have I am NOT an auntie
Helen cutter but I do think it was the
wrong man at that time and I think he
was the wrong man I think he did the
right things he protested against the
things I think that the developments
that that went wrong but to eat they
didn't work and that's why I think is
that his protest didn't carry the day as
for the Dulles report as a criticism or
voted no confidence I mean surely that's
technically true no report is that it's
really the
what I was really referring to was the
National Security Council a document in
July which said carried out and that
also was not formally speaking at all a
vote of no-confidence but I think it was
effectively because I think what
happened if you look Helen kind of
really didn't do very much about the
Dulles report and maybe for good reason
over I say if the National Security
Council had decided that's what should
be done and nothing was done on it
really until people Smith came into
office that I think Helen cutter for
better for worse they've lost his
effectiveness as as director carrying
out the national security council's
wishes
yeah if I could just say a couple of
things on this and Walter Ford Simon
knows well that I'm no expert on this at
all but it seems to me that we're
working from a sense a very restricted
range of sources as far as I can tell be
the criticism to helicoprion Carter
first emerged in public really with the
release of the Anna Carol a case study
of the CIA for the Church Committee now
that study was based on Carroll act as
his own
access to the official histories of the
CIA and in one of those official
histories which has now been published
as we know there was considerable
criticism pill encoder so we're all
minding the same same material and I'm
quite prepared to to here certainly a
different line on Hill in culture one of
the things that has always impressed me
about him is that it concerns his very
vigorous and courageous I would say
defense of the Central Intelligence
Agency in the aftermath of criticisms
about how it had it mishandled the
outbreak of violence in Bogota Colombia
and this was in 1948 at an early stage
in his in his directorship and he
tackled both President Congress and the
press on this issue and came a very
forthright statement to the effect of
the Central Intelligence Agency had not
failed and came to its rescue I think
it's also worth saying that that not
everything in print has been anti Hillen
culture there is certainly one defense
on the record already which comes from
Rodri Jeffries Jones's second study of
the Central Intelligence Agency where he
where he argues as far as I can recall
the argument that Hillen culture has to
be credited for for keeping the CIA
alive and difficult transitional time so
I think we're hearing you
Walter you honor repost
I'd like to make two points as to Bogota
Wesley I'm so delighted did you find we
did well up there it was a very
interesting afternoon but it was one of
those days when we had all the cards in
our hands and hilly played them to the
fullest I was up there with him and
watched it all we had the reports and
there we learned for the first time know
the congressman that the key report on
Bogota the Bogota saw uprising had been
withheld in the embassy by order of the
State Department liaison man who had
come down in advance of the Congress
which was to meet down there where
secretary Marshall was to be present and
the Communists had planned to molest the
person of the secretary and the liaison
man who'd come down as the advance man
convinced the Ambassador bollock don't
send this report back to the State
Department they'll have an absolute
hysterectomy right on the floor and
it'll scare the secretary leave it here
and it took its days and days and days
to get that report back by hand and boat
and messenger and that was really the
key to the Bogata Bogata hearing but
Chen I would like if you and Dave don't
mind to pose one question that I've sat
on for 20 years it isn't in your text it
was in Tom powers text and that is the
quote failure unquote of CIA - really
- spot the forthcoming atomic energy
explosion the five-year business always
with the director when he testified for
the House Committee on Foreign Relations
that it would be about three years but
what we didn't know and I leave it to
you historians to dig it up it's a story
I've sat on for 20 or 30 years but I was
informed that the reason we didn't know
about the Soviet explosion was because
the bureau had not told us
about the Rosenberg case on the handing
over the trigger mechanism for the bomb
to the Soviets which would have changed
our estimates vary considerably I don't
know if that report is true or not but I
don't think we need to sit on it any
longer and I hope the history people
will have a look at it yeah
some questions
I'm Jimmy Collins my affiliation is kind
of a vague at the moment I would like to
go back to the previous panel and I know
that they didn't have time to talk about
the the OSS effort and conjunction with
the British to mobilize the French
underground or the FFI but as a
battalion commander in Normandy and
coming across France I met some of their
products and I thought that they were of
considerable help to us at that time and
I don't know whether professor Katz
would like to give a little bit more on
the effort that OSS put in to this
French underground effort
I probably shouldn't go into lots and
lots of details I was in the kind of
embarrassing position when I gave my
talk which already ran way longer than I
anticipated of trying to touch upon what
I regarded as some of the most salient
and influential activities of OSS and
invariably I missed a whole lot and and
skimmed very superficially over a lot of
other things are you talking about the
Jedburgh missions in particular yeah
the jet Berg's were I think among the
most spectacularly successful things
that OSS did in the field I'm not myself
terrifically expert on the ins and outs
of the operational activities but it
involves cooperative teams of OSS
operational agents together with British
SOE Special Operations Executive people
working in alliance with members of free
French and with often great personal
courage and and considerable heroism
attempted to lay a kind of an
infrastructure of subversion within
France in the oh gosh when did it start
I guess in in the last two years of the
war and basically to prepare the ground
for extensive subversion of the German
war effort there but there's a pretty
fair literature on that I believe but
thank you for pointing out that one out
of a very very large number of omissions
could I also ask myself a question I'm
just curious how many people here served
in OSS
but I I should have maybe we add that we
may have more than one veteran of the
jet Berg's but I know we have at least
one another here but William Colby
former director of Central Intelligence
that very distinguished record with the
jet birds and that is an important part
I should mention also the gentleman I
asked the question is General James
Lawton Collins who's the former chief of
military history for the army and notes
quite a lot about history as well as the
the war that he fought here Ken okay Ken
Canales from the Kennedy School I wanted
to ask you about your sins of commission
particularly undertaking the covert
action mission was your objection to the
substance of the fact that we are the
operations themselves or the fact that
the agency undertook this mission yeah I
was afraid I'd be asked that and I
suppose the quicken answer would be that
historians are always better at
predicting the past I can complain about
what happened but I'm not sure I have to
present a counter history of what could
have been better I would say I probably
would come out briefly along the same
line that I think it's a little obscure
as we've already heard but what I think
Harry Truman was getting at and that is
not so much I mean he approved the
creation of OPC and the commitment and
covert action I don't think though at
that time there was any idea that it
would become so huge that it would carry
out some do so much it really didn't get
into paramilitary covert action until
the Korean War and it really spread into
that in a big way in things like
Guatemala cou in 1954 and Iran at 53 and
so on
not until the Allen Dulles an Eisenhower
period and I think that's where the
where that mission became either too
large for a CIA and that tastes the
implication is it should have been
carried out by somebody else in the
military is the obvious candidate or
else it was just simply too large period
that more was done than should have been
done and I think that's also true so I
think I probably take a bit of both of
those answers and I think that's what
Harry Truman was getting out in a fairly
floundering way in his complaints that
CIA wasn't doing what he thought what he
thought it was going to do when he
started it
he knew it was going to do espionage he
knew it was going to do he signed and
approved the office of policy
coordination so it was no surprise to
that I don't think that it was expected
to go to become the the size commitment
that did and I would just repeat what I
said at the conclusion if you look at
the the most damaging probably the Time
of Troubles for a Central Intelligence
Agency and the investigations of 1975 in
1976 starting with the Rockefeller
Commission and the Church Committee and
the Senate and the pike committee in the
house and a year and a half of really
agonizing period most of that focused on
covert action and so that sort of is a
retrospective if that was and that in
many ways CIA's have great difficulty
recovering from from from that that
agonizing period and so surely covert
action is part of that
with this
Wednesday CIA director james woolsey
resigned we'll have a callin program
Thursday morning on his resignation
beginning at 8:45 Eastern Time
on our companion Network c-span